
        The Generic Multiparty Transport Protocol (swift)

Status of this Memo

   This is a work-in-progress memo.

Copyright Notice

Abstract

   This text is intended to explain inner workings of the swift
   (peer-to-peer transport protocol), which is currently work in
   progress. swift was devised to simplify and unify the peer-to-peer/
   peer-assisted/ multi-source download domain with the long-term
   practical goal of embedding it into mass software and hardware.


Table of Contents

   1.  Requirements notation
   2.  Introduction
   3.  Design goals
   4.  swift subsystems and design choices
     4.1.  The atomic datagram principle
     4.2.  Handshake and multiplexing
     4.3.  Data integrity and on-demand Merkle hashes
     4.4.  Generic acknowledgements
     4.5.  Peer exchange and NAT hole punching
     4.6.  Congestion control
     4.7.  Hints and piece picking
   5. Security Considerations
   6. Pending issues
   7. Normative References
   Author's address

1.  Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
   

2.  Introduction

   Historically, the Internet was based on end-to-end unicast
   communication, mostly carried out using TCP. Still, the need for
   distribution of heavyweight content to masses of users persisted
   and, considering the failure of multicast, was addressed by
   different technologies, which ultimately boiled down to maintaining
   and coordinating distributed replicas. On one hand, downloading
   from a nearby well-provisioned replica is somewhat faster and/or
   cheaper; on the other hand, it requires to coordinate multiple
   parties (the data source, mirrors/CDN sites/peers, consumers). As
   the Internet progresses to richer and richer content, the overhead
   of peer/replica coordination becomes dwarfed by the mass of the
   download itself. Thus, the niche for multiparty transfers expands.
   Still, current, relevant technologies are tightly coupled to a
   single usecase or even infrastructure of a particular corporation.
   The mission of the project is to create a generic content-centric
   multiparty transport protocol to allow seamless, effortless data
   dissemination on the Net. 
   
         | mirror-based   peer-assisted        peer-to-peer
   ------+----------------------------------------------------
   data  | SunSITE        CacheLogic VelociX   BitTorrent
   VoD   | YouTube        Azureus(+seedboxes)  SwarmPlayer
   live  | Akamai Str.    Octoshape, Joost     PPlive
                   TABLE 1. Usecases.


3.  Design goals

   The technical focus of the swift protocol is to find the simplest
   solution involving the minimum set of primitives, still being
   sufficient to implement all the targeted usecases (see Table 1),
   suitable for use in general-purpose software and hardware (i.e. a
   web browser or a set-top box).
   The five design goals for the protocol are:

   1. Embeddable kernel-ready protocol.
   2. Embrace both real-time streaming and download. 
   3. Short warm-up times.
   4. Transparent NAT traversal.
   5. Non-intrusive congestion control.

   Later in the draft, the objectives are referenced as (1)-(5).

   The goal of embedding (1) means that the protocol must be ready to
   function as a regular transport protocol inside a set-top box,
   mobile device, a browser or even in the kernel space. Thus, the
   protocol must have light footprint, even less than TCP due to the
   necessity to support numerous ongoing connections as well as to
   constantly probe the network for new possibilities. The practical
   overhead for TCP is estimated at 10KB per connection [HTTP1MLN]. We
   aim at 1KB per peer connected. Also, the amount of code necessary
   to make a basic implementation must be limited to 10KLoC of C.
   Otherwise, besides the resource considerations, maintaining and
   auditing the code might become prohibitively expensive.

   The support for all three basic usecases of real-time streaming,
   in-order download and out-of-order download (2) is necessary for
   the manifested goal of THE multiparty transport protocol as no
   single usecase dominates over the others.

   The objective of short warm-up times (3) is the matter of end-user
   experience; the playback must start as soon as possible. Thus
   at the transport layer any unnecessary initialization roundtrips
   and warm-up cycles must be eliminated.
   
   Transparent NAT traversal (4) is absolutely necessary as at least
   60% of today's users are hidden behind NATs. NATs severely affect
   conection patterns in P2P networks thus impacting performance and
   fairness [MOLNAT,LUCNAT].
   
   Custom non-intrusive congestion control (5) is a must-have as
   interference of downloads with the regular traffic is the main
   incentive for the end-user to shut down the program. Advanced
   bandwidth-scavenging congestion control techniques might
   potentially lead to incentiveless seeding (see Sec. 4.6). Besides
   that, behavior patterns of swarming download applications are so
   special and bandwidth consumption is so high that custom congestion
   control makes sense in the general case.
   

4.  swift subsystems and design choices

   To large extent, swift design is defined by the cornerstone decision
   to get rid of TCP and not to reinvent any TCP-like transports on
   top of UDP or otherwise. The requirements (1), (4), (5) make TCP a
   bad choice due to its high per-connection footprint, complex and
   less reliable NAT traversal and fixed predefined congestion control
   algorithms. Besides that, an important consideration is that no
   block of TCP functionality turns out to be useful for the general
   case of swarming downloads. Namely,
     1. in-order delivery is less useful as peer-to-peer protocols
     often employ out-of-order delivery themselves and in either case
     out-of-order data can still be stored;
     2. reliable delivery/retransmissions are less useful because
     the same data might be requested from different sources; as
     in-order delivery is not necessary, packet losses might be
     patched up lazily, without stopping the flow of data;
     3. flow control is not necessary as the receiver is much less
     likely to be saturated with the data and even if so, that
     situation is perfectly detected by the congestion control
     4. TCP congestion control is less useful as custom congestion
     control is often needed.
   In general, TCP is built and optimized for a different usecase than
   we have with swarmed downloads. The abstraction of a “data pipe”
   orderly delivering some stream of bytes from one peer to another
   turned out to be irrelevant. In even more general terms, TCP
   supports the abstraction of pairwise _conversations_, while we need
   a content-centric protocol built around the abstraction of a cloud
   of participants disseminating the same _data_ in any way and order
   that is convenient to them.
   
   Thus, the choice is to make a UDP-based transport, possibly
   reserving HTTP tonneling as an universal fallback. Further, instead
   of reimplementing TCP we create a datagram-based protocol,
   completely dropping the sequential data stream abstraction. Ripping
   of unnecessary features of TCP makes it easier both to implement
   the protocol and to check it for vulnerabilities; numerous TCP
   vulnerabilities were caused by complexity of the protocol's state
   machine.
   Pursuing the maxim of making  things as simple as possible but not
   simpler, we fit the protocol into the constraints of the transport
   layer by dropping all the transmission's technical metadata except
   for the content's root hash (compare to e.g. .torrent files in
   BitTorrent). Elimination of technical metadata was achieved through
   the use of Merkle hash trees, exclusively single-file transfers
   and other techniques. As a result, a transfer is identified and
   bootstrapped by its root hash only.
   To avoid the usual layering of positive/negative acknowledgement
   mechanisms we design a scale-invariant acknowledgement system (Sec
   4.4). The system allows for aggregation and variable level of
   detail in requesting, announcing and acknowledging data, in-order
   or out-of-order with equal ease.
   Besides the protocol's footprint, we also target the size of a
   minimal useful interaction; every single datagram might be checked
   for data integrity, consumed or relayed immediately once received.

4.1.  The atomic datagram principle

   Ideally, every datagram sent must be independent of other
   datagrams, so each datagram SHOULD be processed separately and a
   loss of one datagram MUST NOT disrupt the flow. Thus, a datagram
   carries zero or more messages, and neither messages nor message
   interdependencies should span over multiple datagrams. In
   particular, any data piece is verified using uncle hash chains; all
   hashes necessary for verifying data integrity are put into the same
   datagram as the data (Sec. 4.3). As a general rule, if some
   additional data is still missing to process a message within a
   datagram, the message SHOULD be dropped.

   Each datagram starts with four bytes corresponding to the receiving
   channel number (Sec. 4.2). The rest of a datagram is a
   concatenation of messages. Each message within a datagram has fixed
   length, depending on the type of the message. The first byte of a
   message denotes its type. Integers are serialized in the network
   (big-endian) byte order. Variable-length messages, free-form text
   or JSON/bencoded objects are not allowed. 
   Consider an example of an acknowledgement message (Sec 4.4). It has
   message type of 2 and a payload of a four-byte integer (say, 1); it
   might be written in hex as: "02 00000001". Later in the document, a
   hex-like two char per byte notation is used to represent message
   formats.

4.2.  Handshake and multiplexing

   For the sake of simplicity, one transfer always deals with one file
   only. Retrieval of large collections of files is done by retrieving
   a directory list file and then recursively retrieving files, which
   might also turn to be directory lists. To distinguish different
   transfers between the same pair of peers, the protocol introduces
   an additional layer of multiplexing, the channels. "Channels"
   loosely correspond to TCP connections; "content" of a single
   "channel" is a single file. A channel is established with a
   handshake. To start a handshake, the initiating peer needs to know
   (1) the requested peer's IP address
   (2) peer's UDP port and
   (3) root hash of the content (see Sec. 4.5).
   The handshake is made by a HANDSHAKE message, whose only payload is
   a channel number. HANDSHAKE message type is 0. The initiating
   handshake must be followed by the transfer's root hash.
   
   Initiator sends an initiating datagram to a peer:
      00000000  00 00000011  04 7FFFFFFF
      1234123412341234123412341234123412341234
   (to unknown channel, handshake from channel 0x11, initiating a
   transfer for a file with a root hash 123...1234)
   
   Peer's response datagram:
      00000011  00 00000022  02 00000003
   (peer to the initiator: use channel number 0x22 for this transfer;
   I also have first 4 kilobytes of the file, see Sec. 4.3)
   
   At this point, the initiator knows that the peer really responds;
   for that purpose channel ids MUST be random enough to prevent easy
   guessing. So, the third datagram of a handshake MAY already contain
   some heavy payload. To minimize the number of initialization
   roundtrips, the first two datagrams MAY also contain some minor
   payload, e.g. a couple of ACK messages roughly indicating the
   current progress of a peer or a HINT (see Sec. 4.7).
      00000022
   (this is a simple zero-payload keepalive datagram; at this point
   both peers have the proof they really talk to each other; three-way
   handshake is complete)
   
   In general, no error codes or responses are used in the protocol;
   absence of any response indicates an error. Invalid messages are
   discarded.
   
   Simple NAT hole punching [SNP] introduces the scenario when both
   parties of the handshake are initiators. To avoid creation of two
   transfers in the case both initiating datagrams get through, both
   peers must then act as responding peers. Thus, once an initiating
   datagram is sent and another initiating "counter"-datagram is
   received, the initiating peer sends a response datagram with the
   same channel id as in the outstanding initiating datagram.


4.3.  Generic acknowledgements

   Generic acknowledgements came out of the need to simplify the
   data addressing/requesting/acknowledging mechanics, which tends
   to become overly complex and multilayered with the conventional
   approach. Take BitTorrent+TCP tandem for example:
   
   1. Its highest-level unit is a ``torrent'', physically a byte range
   resulting from concatenation of one or many content files.
   2. A torrent is divided into ``pieces'', typically about a thousand
   of them. Pieces are used to communicate own progress to other
   peers. Pieces are also basic data integrity units, as the torrent's
   metadata includes SHA1 hash for every piece.
   3. The actual data transfers are requested and made in 16KByte
   units, named blocks or chunks.
   4. The ``basic'' data unit is of course a byte of content.
   5. Still, one layer lower, TCP also operates with bytes and byte
   offsets which are totally different from the torrent's bytes and
   offsets as TCP considers cumulative byte offsets for all content
   sent by a connection, be it data, metadata or commands.
   6. Finally, one more layer lower IP transfers independent datagrams
   (typically around a kilobyte), which TCP then reassembles into
   continuous streams.
   
   Obviously, such addressing schemes need lots of mappings; from
   piece number and block to file(s) and offset(s) to TCP sequence
   numbers to the actual packets and the other way around. Lots of
   complexity is introduced by mismatch of bounds: packet bounds are
   different from file, block or hash/piece bounds. The picture is
   typical for a codebase which was historically layered.
   
   To simplify this aspect, we employ a generic content addressing
   scheme based on binary intervals (shortcutted "bins"). The base
   interval is 1KB "packet", the top interval is the complete file.
   Till Sec. 4.4.1 any file is considered to be 2**k bytes long.
   The binary tree of intervals is simple, well-understood, correlates
   well with machine representation of integers and the structure of
   Merkle hashes (Sec. 4.4). A novel addition to the classical scheme
   are "bin numbers", a scheme of numbering binary intervals which
   lays them out into a vector nicely. Bin numbering is done in the
   order of interval's "center", ascending, namely:

               7
         3          11
      1     5     9    13
    0  2  4  6   8 10 12 14
    
   The number 0xFFFFFFFF (32-bit) or 0xFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF (64-bit)
   stands for an empty interval; 0x7FFFFFFF (32-bit) stands for
   "everything". In general, this numbering system allows to work with
   simpler data structures, e.g. to use arrays instead of binary trees
   in many cases. As a minor convenience, it also allows to use one
   integer instead of two to denote an interval.
   
   Back to the acknowledgement message. An ACK message (type 2) states
   that the sending peer obtained the specified bin and successfully
   checked its integrity:

   02 00000003
   (got/checked first four kilobytes of a file/stream)
   
   For keeping the state information, an implementation MAY use the
   "binmap" datastructure, which is a hybrid of a bitmap and a binary
   tree, discussed in detail in [BINMAP].


4.4.  Data integrity and on-demand Merkle hashes

   The integrity checking scheme is unified for two usecases of
   download and streaming. Also, it works down to the level of a
   single datagram by employing Merkle hash trees [MERKLE]. Peers
   receive chains of uncle hashes just in time to check the incoming
   data. As metadata is restricted to just a single root hash,
   newcomer peers derive the size of a file from hashes. That
   functionalities heavily depend on the concept of peak hashes,
   discussed in Sec. 4.4.1. Any specifics related to the cases of file
   download and streaming is discussed in Sec. 4.4.2, 4.4.3
   respectively.
  
   Here, we discuss the common part of the workflow. As a general
   rule, the sender SHOULD prepend data with hashes which are
   necessary for verifying that data, no more, no less. While some
   optimistic optimizations are definitely possible, the receiver
   SHOULD drop data if it is impossible to verify it. Before sending a
   packet of data to the reciever, the sender inspects the receiver's
   previous acknowledgements to derive which hashes the receiver
   already has for sure. 
   Suppose, the receiver had acknowledged bin 1 (first two kilobytes
   of the file), then it must already have uncle hashes 5, 11 and so
   on. That is because those hashes are necessary to check packets of
   bin 1 against the root hash. Then, hashes 3, 7 and so on must be
   also known as they are calculated in the process of checking the
   uncle hash chain. Hence, to send bin 12 (i.e. the 7th kilobyte of
   data), the sender needs to prepend hashes for bins 14 and 9, which
   let the data be checked against hash 11 which is already known to
   the receiver. 
   The sender MUST put into the datagram the chain of uncle hashes
   necessary for verification of the packet, always before the data
   message itself, i.e.:

   04 00000009 F01234567890ABCDEF1234567890ABCDEF123456
   04 0000000E 01234567890ABCDEF1234567890ABCDEF1234567
   (uncle hashes for the packet 12)
   
   The sender MAY optimistically skip hashes which were sent out in
   previous (still unacknowledged) datagrams. It is an optimization
   tradeoff between redundant hash transmission and possibility of
   collateral data loss in the case some necessary hashes were lost in
   the network so some delivered data cannot be verified and thus
   has to be dropped.
   In either way, the receiver builds the Merkle tree on-demand,
   incrementally, starting from the root hash, and uses it for data
   validation.
   
   
4.4.1. Peak hashes

   The concept of peak hashes enables two cornerstone features of
   download/streaming unification, and file size proving. Formally,
   peak hashes are hashes defined over filled bins, whose parent
   hashes are defined over incomplete (not filled) bins. Filled bin is
   a bin which does not extend past the end of the file, or, more
   precisely, contains no empty packets. Practically, we use peak
   hashes to cover the data range with logarithmical number of hashes,
   so each hash is defined over a "round" aligned 2^k interval.
   As an example, suppose a file is 7162 bytes long. That fits into
   7 packets, the tail packet being 1018 bytes long. The binary
   representation for 7 is 111. Here we might note that in general,
   every "1" in binary representation of the file's packet length
   corresponds to a peak hash. Namely, for this particular file we'll
   have three peaks, bin numbers 3, 9, 12.
   Thus, once a newcomer joins a swarm, the first peer sending him
   data prepends it with peak hashes; the newcomer checks them against
   the root hash (see Sec 4.2.2).
   
   04 00000003 1234567890ABCDEF1234567890ABCDEF12345678
   04 00000009 234567890ABCDEF1234567890ABCDEF123456789
   04 0000000C 34567890ABCDEF1234567890ABCDEF1234567890
   (this sequence of peak hashes proves that a file is 7KB long)


4.4.2. Hash trees for files 

   In the case of static file download a transfer is bootstrapped with
   a root hash. The root hash corresponds to the root bin covering
   the entire 2**63 KB data range. Every hash in the tree is defined
   in the usual way, as a SHA-1 hash of a concatenation of two
   lower-level SHA-1 hashes, corresponding to left and right data
   half-ranges resp. For example,
                hash_1 = SHA1 (hash_0+hash_2)
   where + stands for concatenation and hash_i stands for Merkle hash
   of the bin number i. Obviously, that does not hold for the
   base-layer hashes, which are normal SHA-1 hashes over 1KB data
   ranges ("packets"), except probably for the tail packet, which
   might have less than 1KB of data. The normal recursive formula does
   not apply to empty bins, i.e. bins that have no data absolutely;
   their hashes are just zeros.
   
   Lemma. Peak hashes could be checked against the root hash.
   Proof. (a) Any peak hash is always the left sibling. Otherwise, be
   it the right sibling, its left neighbor/sibling must also be
   defined over a filled bin, so their parent is also defined over a
   filled bin, contradiction. (b) For the rightmost peak hash, its
   right sibling is zero. (c) For any peak hash, its right sibling
   might be calculated using peak hashes to the left and zeros for
   empty bins. (d) Once the right sibling of the leftmost peak hash
   is calculated, its parent might be calculated. (e) Once that parent
   is calculated, we might trivially get to the root hash by
   concatenating the hash with zeros and hashing it repeatedly.
   
   Informally, the Lemma might be expressed as follows: peak hashes
   cover all data, so the remaining hashes are either trivial (zeros)
   or might be calculated from peak hashes and zero hashes.
   
   Thus, once a peer gets peak hashes and checks them against the
   root hash, it learns the file size and it also gets practical
   anchors for building uncle chains during the transmission (as the
   root hash is too high in the sky). A newcomer peer MAY signal it
   already has peak hashes by acknowledging any bin, even empty one:
   02 FFFFFFFF
   Otherwise, the first of the senders bootstraps him with all the
   peak hashes.
   

4.4.3. Hash trees for streams
   
   In the case of live streaming a transfer is bootstrapped with a
   public key instead of a root hash, as the root hash is undefined
   or, more precisely, transient, as long as new data keeps coming.
   Stream/download unification is achieved by sending signed peak
   hashes on-demand, ahead of the actual data. Similarly to the
   previous case, the sender mightuse acknowledgements to derive which
   data range the receiver has peak hashes for and to prepend the data
   and the uncle hashes with the necessary (signed) peak hashes.
   Except for the fact that the set of peak hashes changes with the
   time, other parts of the algorithm work as described in 4.4.3 As we
   see, in both cases data length is not known on advance, bit derived
   on-the-go from the peak hashes. Suppose, our 7KB stream extended to
   another kilobyte. Thus, now hash 15 becomes the only peak hash,
   eating hashes 7, 10, 11 and the source sends out a signed peak hash
   message (type 7) to announce the fact:
   
   07 0000000F 1234567890ABCDEF1234567890ABCDEF12345678 SOME-SIGN-HERE


4.5.  Peer exchange and NAT hole punching

   Peer exchange messages are common for many peer-to-peer protocols.
   By exchanging peer IP addresses in gossip fashion, the central
   coordinating entities (trackers) might be releived of unnecessary
   work. Following the example of BitTorrent, swift features two types
   of PEX messages: "peer connected" (type 5) and "peer disconnected"
   (type 6). Peers are represented as IPv4 address-port pairs:
   05 7F000000 1F40
   (connected to 127.0.0.1:8000)
   
   To unify peer exchange and NAT hole punching functionality, the
   sending pattern of PEX messages is restricted. As swift handshake
   is able to do simple NAT hole punching [SNP] transparently, PEX
   messages must be emitted in the way to facilitate that. Namely,
   once peer A introduces peer B to peer C by sending a PEX message to
   C, it SHOULD also send a message to B introducing C. The messages
   MUST be within 2 seconds from each other, but MAY and better not be
   simultaneous, leaving a gap of twice the "typical" RTT, i.e.
   300-600ms. The peers are supposed to initiate handshakes to each
   other thus forming a simple NAT hole punching pattern where the
   introducing peer effectively acts as a STUN server. Still, peers
   MAY ignore PEX messages if uninterested in obtaining new peers or
   because of security considerations (rate limiting) or any other
   reason.


4.6.  Congestion control

   swift employs pluggable congestion control. In general, it is 
   expected that servers would use TCP-like congestion control schemes
   such as classic AIMD or CUBIC [CUBIC]. End-user peers are expected
   to use weaker-than-TCP (least than best effort) congestion control,
   such as [LEDBAT] to minimize seeding counter-incentives.


4.7.  Data requests (HINTs)

   While bulk download protocols normally do explicit requests for
   certain ranges of data (e.g. BitTorrent's REQUEST message), live
   streaming protocols quite often do without to save round trips.
   Explicit requests are often needed for security purposes; consider
   that BitTorrent can only verify hashes of complete pieces that 
   might consist of multiple blocks requested from many peers.
   As swift has no such implications, it is supposed to work both 
   ways. Namely, a peer SHOULD send out requested pieces, while it
   also may send some other data in case it runs out of requests or
   on some other reason. To emphasize that, request messages are named
   HINTs; their only purpose is to coordinate peers and to avoid
   unnecessary data retransmission. A peer is supposed to process
   HINTs sequentially. HINT message type is 3.
   03 00000009
   (a peer requests fifth and sixth packets)
   

5. Security Considerations

   simplify as possible (e.g. no buffer overruns) Still, resource,
   membership subverting [] for DDoS Thus, implementation MUST at
   least rate-limit activity to untested destinations. E.g. 4 attempts
   a second: million peers, 1Gb/sec, amplification ratio 4.


6.6. Extensibility

6.1.1. Different crypto/hashing schemes
6.1.2. IPv6
6.1.3. Congestion control algorithms
6.1.4. Piece picking algorithms
6.1.5. Reciprocity algorithms
6.1.6. 32 bit vs 64 bit

References

[RFC2119] Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels
[HTTP1MLN] Richard Jones. "A Million-user Comet Application with
    Mochiweb", Part 3. http://www.metabrew.com/article/
    a-million-user-comet-application-with-mochiweb-part-3
[MOLNAT] J.J.D. Mol, J.A. Pouwelse, D.H.J. Epema and H.J. Sips:
    "Free-riding, Fairness, and Firewalls in P2P File-Sharing"
    8-th IEEE International Conference on Peer-to-Peer Computing
    2008, pp 301-310
[LUCNAT] submitted
[BINMAP] V. Grishchenko, J. Pouwelse: "Binmaps: hybridizing bitmaps
    and binary trees" http://bouillon.math.usu.ru/articles/
    binmaps-alenex.pdf
[SNP] B. Ford, P. Srisuresh, D. Kegel: "Peer-to-Peer Communication
    Across Network Address Translators", 
    http://www.brynosaurus.com/pub/net/p2pnat/
[MERKLE] Merkle, R. A Digital Signature Based on a Conventional
    Encryption Function. Proceedings CRYPTO'87, Santa Barbara, CA,
    USA, Aug 1987. pp 369-378.
[CUBIC] Injong Rhee, and Lisong Xu: "CUBIC: A New TCP-Friendly
    High-Speed TCP Variant", 
    http://www4.ncsu.edu/~rhee/export/bitcp/cubic-paper.pdf
[LEDBAT] S. Shalunov: "Low Extra Delay Background Transport (LEDBAT)"
    http://www.ietf.org/id/draft-ietf-ledbat-congestion-00.txt

Author's address
